---
title: "Lead distribution in the European Arctic derived from Sentinel-1 SAR images"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2017_IGS.md
venue: "IGS: Polar Ice, Polar Climate, Polar Change"
date: 2017-08-17
location: "Boulder, Colorado, US"
---

The presence of leads with open water or thin ice is an important feature of the Arctic sea ice cover.
Leads regulate the heat, gas, and moisture fluxes between the ocean and atmosphere and are areas of high ice-growth rates during winter time.
Here, an algorithm providing automatic lead detection based on synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images is described and applied to three winter seasons in the European Arctic.
The Sentinel-1 constellation of two satellites provides dual-channel C-band measurements (co- and cross-polarized modes) independent of weather and season.
In the Arctic the Extra Wide Swath Mode with a resolution of about 100 m is used, which allows identification of leads of about 200 m width or larger.
By using both channels instead of single co-polarized observations the algorithm is able to classify more leads correctly.
The performance of algorithms based on polarimetric features and texture features derived from the gray-level co-occurrence matrix are compared.
The Random Forest classifier is used to investigate the importance of the individual features for lead detection.
The evaluation of the results is based on comparisons with Sentinel-2 optical data.
Leads were identified in single scenes and then combined to maps covering a larger region.
Two-daily composite lead maps of the European Arctic show a higher occurrence of arc-shaped leads north of Fram Strait.
A time series of lead maps was obtained for three consecutive winter seasons (2014–17).
Lead concentrations were derived from these maps and compared with results of algorithms utilizing MODIS and CryoSat-2/SIRAL observations.
Size distribution and lead occurrence probability were analyzed.
